---
layout: posts
title:  "Web 3.0 - Web3 - Semantic Web"
date:   2022-09-18 14:34:00
categories: Web3
author: Jonathan
---

<br>
There has been a lot of uncertainty behind the differences between Web 3.0, the Semantic Web, and Web3. The chatter around these three concepts has been entertaining and exciting, but also wildly confusing because they are often used interchangeably. However, it’s easy to see how Web 3.0 could be mistaken for Web3, so we won’t point fingers. We’ve all been there at some point.

Web 3.0, the Semantic Web, and Web3 can all be ambiguous in conversations because they are largely a work in progress, the concepts overlap, and people unintentionally use the terms interchangeably. Despite all of the overlapping, Web 3.0 is not synonymous with either Web3 or the Semantic Web. Each of these concepts deserve their own article, but for the sake of simplicity and understanding, let’s save that for another time. Let’s break down these terms in chunks. Starting with Web 3.0, let’s run through some history to see how the World Wide Web has evolved.

<br>

<h1 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> World Wide Web History </h1>

<br>

<h2 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> Web 1.0 (Syntactic/Hypertext Web): Read-Only (1989-2005) </h2>

Berners-Lee wrote three fundamental technologies supporting this era:
HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
Uniform Resource Identifier/Locator (URI/URL)
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)

This is essentially an informational web. Most information is static and retrieved from servers. Content creation was not prevalent and most users were consumers of content.

<br>

<h2 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> Web 2.0 (Social Web): Read-Write (2005-Current)</h2>

Web 2.0 is the social web that you know and love today. It’s distinguished by its social interaction and user-generated content powered by mobile internet access and applications. In this iteration of the Web, data flow has become bidirectional.

Technologies supporting this era:
JavaScript (Brendan Eich)
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX - Jesse James Garrett)

Although there is more connectivity in Web 2.0, most user data is centralized within large tech companies. This user data is being monetized and users do not have full control over their own content and monetization.

<br>

<h2 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> Web 3.0 (Semantic Web): Read-Write-Execute (In development) </h2>

Web 3.0 is still in its infancy, but aims to produce a decentralized Web where all of its data is machine-readable.

Two main technologies are utilized to enable the encoding of semantics with the data:
RDF (Resource Description Framework)
OWL (Web Ontology Language)

In addition to being machine-readable, Web 3.0 decentralized apps (DApps) are also built on blockchains or decentralized networks instead of single servers or cloud providers. Participants who contribute towards the network are rewarded to incentivize a growing, stable decentralized network. Because of how central semantics are to Web 3.0, it is sometimes referred to as the Semantic Web.

<br>

<h1 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> The Semantic Web </h1>


The Semantic Web acts as an integrator establishing a framework that enables proliferation and recycling of information across the web. Berners-Lee, who coined the Semantic Web in 2006, envisions a Web where computers are able to analyze all Web data and our daily lives will be handed by machines talking to machines. This means that machines will better understand the intent of a query and produce more useful results.

<br>

<h1 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> Web3 (Blockchain Context) </h1>


Web3 was coined in 2014 by Gavin Wood, Polkadot founder and Ethereum co-founder., who described it as a decentralized online ecosystem based on blockchain. Web3 primarily focuses on decentralization, blockchain technologies including cryptocurrencies and NFTs (non-fungible tokens), security, and restoring control of data and identity to users.

<br>

<h1 style = "text-align: center; font-weight:bold;"> Connecting The Pieces </h1>


In comparing the three concepts, we can start by looking at the different missions of Web 3.0, the Semantic Web, and Web3. Web 3.0 embodies the natural evolution of the Web and its goal is to advance technology to where the Semantic Web exists and can leverage AI and 3D graphics in a ubiquitous fashion. The Semantic Web aims to link the Web and make it machine readable. And finally, Web3 is focused on building new technologies and applications on top of blockchains.


Despite the different approaches and goals, many sources still equate the Semantic Web to Web 3.0; however, the Semantic Web is a single pillar of the Big 3.0. On top of the Semantic Web, Web 3.0 also aims to develop and leverage technologies such as AI, 3D Graphics and newer technologies as the Web continues to mature.
 And although there are many posts outlining the differences between the Semantic Web/Web 3.0 and Web3, there is little to no discussion about how Web 3.0 actually embraces these two different concepts. Web 3.0 can become completely machine readable and contain decentralized blockchain applications at the same time. Essentially, Web 3.0 is the highest level concept and the Semantic Web and Web3 fall beneath it.

<br>

<h1> In Plain Semantics: </h1>

The Semantic Web is a subset of Web 3.0 focused on making all information on the Web machine-readable by leveraging artificial intelligence to produce more useful results.

Web3 is another subset of Web 3.0 focused on developing new technologies and applications using a blockchain.

Web 3.0 is the natural progression of the Web as we transition away from Web 2.0 and not only embodies Web3 and Semantic Web ideals, but also Artificial Intelligence, 3D Graphics, and other technologies that are yet to come.

<br>
